---
title: Key to Success in China
layout: post
---
Some weeks ago Coca-Cola announced their Chinese ambition: triple their 
annual sales of non-alcoholic drinks by 2020 in China. The number of 
cases sold will, by their plans, reach 30 billion annually. Coca-Colas 
expansion plans target to double its global revenues from 100USD billion 
to 200USD billion annually in the next 10 years. The company expects 
that 60% of its new growth will come from China, India and other 
emerging markets.

It comes without surprise that China is an attractive playfield for 
companies of all shapes and sizes. Chinas 1.3 billion people represent 
Earths largest consuming market in one blow.  It is very tempting to any 
business man or woman to see the potential here.

As one walks around the streets of Beijing, it is easy to see the dream 
of huge profits just knocking at the door: teenagers with their eyes 
glued to their portable video games, hundreds of modern mobile phones 
been used for all sorts of tasks, famous western brands been dressed 
from tip to toes, a modern and new freight of cars parading on the 
spotless 6, 7 or even 11-lane roads. All these signs of prosperity and 
modernity are already in place and are just small examples of a much 
bigger universe.

Companies have been trying and experimenting with ways of achieving 
success in China since its market reforms of the 70s and 80s. For some, 
it has been a profitable endeavor right up front, but for most, it has 
been a fiercely hard battle leading to many just dropping out or ramping 
down their Chinese investments at once.

What is the key to success in China? In one simple word: understanding. 
Many scholars have tried to explain the differences or similarities of 
the Chinese culture with the Western culture and, based mainly on its 
differences, a whole aura of mystery has been established. The truth is 
that this mist of mystery can be dissipated if business people take a 
step back and spare some time to really understand China.

Here is where the difficulty really starts. Understanding does not come 
without immersion, without participation and lots of observation. In a 
business world were some still try to focus on quick wins this means bad 
news: you cannot rush to understand the Chinese market. China is a 
2.500-year civilization; they are not willing to rush.

The bad news continues: understanding is not only about spending enough 
time. It is also about immersing into their culture and, by doing so, 
also realizing our distinct, western-centric view of it. Failing to 
perceive this point can be very embarrassing as has been the case with 
Nike. 

Nike is world famous for having aggressive and efficient marketing 
campaigns and therefore, has a huge budget to hire to most expensive 
marketing agencies available. Nikes marketers made a genuine effort to 
understand Chinas culture but ultimately failed. They combined all 
elements cherished by their target market: basketball, action, kung fu, 
ghosts and dragons all marinated in fantastic visual effects. From a 
western perspective, the commercial campaign looked amazing: a perfect 
blend of eastern components with the modernity brought by sports and, of 
course, Nike as a cornerstone. The problem is that, from a Chinese 
perspective, the commercial looked as some obnoxious American had just 
disrespected Chinese Gods, symbols and values  all in one big blow.

The valuable understanding required here also comes with the full 
awareness that we are tainted with our western vision and, it is through 
this stained-glass that we perceive the Chinese market. This fact can be 
either a pain or a blessing. We just have to work hard towards making it 
a blessing.
